
   Nomen est omen

   Jay Maynard's compiler collection SYSCPK contains a large
   section about SNOBOL4 including a load module of a version 3.5
   The original load module was found on the files
   section of the Hercules-390 yahoo group
   provided by Jan Jaeger as told Jay.

   The implementation seems to be part of a distribution described in
   document s4n3 concerning the V.35 distribution from which Jan Jaeger
   had recovered this loadmodule.  The source tape of the distribution
   seems lost in the multiverse.

   The CBT file 604 was created to provide source by disassembing the
   load module.  Sam Golob wrote about the former verion of the file:

   "I am trying to make the old load module more
   accessible to users with a recent MVS system, but
   since I didn't have the original source, I have
   included a disassembly, which you can assemble and
   linkedit on your own system."

   Early during 2024, René Jansen discovered that FILE 604 was broken.
   THe provided load module immmediately abended from a GETMAIN call,
   by coincidence with abend code 604.

   Veni, vidi, vici

   The used disassembler created misaligned code, e.g., A-constant not
   on a fullword boundary.

   Fortunately, The disassembled source contains comments
   comprising a hex and character view together with an address
   offset. The disassembler was able to create all csects
   of a load module.
   The original load module was not on the cbttape, it is recoverable
   from the SYSCPK. Good.

   The problems thus seems no too difficult to fix ... at first glace.;
   THe goal was to create a sourece that reproduces the SNOBOL4 system.
   Well, we'll see.

   To recover the original load module provided by Jan Jaeger I took
   the IEHMOVE version (on a 3330) and converted it to a load module
   that could IEBCOPYed/XMITed. If you look who the IEBCOPY version
   was made, you understand the proverb about everything is looking
   like a nail. :-)

   The alignment errors were easily fixed, the program began to fly,
   but not very high.

   The disassembler did not generate code for floating point
   instructions (this may have been a option as with other
   disassemblers.)

   But the generated constants (DC X'60' etc.) were not correct.
   In several cases, the constabts contain not only X-constants
   corresponding to the comments, but also C-constants.
   Unfortunately, this part was erroneous.

   I managed to correct this mostly by using some ad-hoc spitbol,
   Neverthelesss, the resulting code compiled and executed.
   It was useful to make a small tool to compare load modules asa post
   processor to AMBLIST.

   Cne part of the goal was abandoned: The different linkage editors
   (binders) have slightly different behaviour, e.g., differently
   ordered ESDs. Different assemblers (or binders?)  also produce
   non-empty data for DS memory zones.

   I could have stopped here.

   Phase 2:

   Although it was possible to fix or reconstruct source
   from comments of the disassembly with considerable
   work (e.g. the used disassembler did not generated
   LD/STD instructions), the result was just a minimal
   set of simplistic assembler to create a load module
   without giving much insight to the software (no base
   registers, etc.)

   In order to get a better version, (and since I was experimenting
   with
   disassembiers),

   I looked at ASMDASM, Gerhard Postpischl's
   DISASM (and even the half century old one from the FELIB).

   The main CSECT S4 is larger than 64K. Gerhard's DISASM uses
   labels that have four characters hex offset. Actually, this
   did not a problem in the end.

   The code contains an ENTRY point DATA. This is not appreciated bt
   DISASM.  Other entry points are tortured.

   Enter ASMDASM.

   Both disassemblers have some partially controllable way
   to distinguish data constants from instructions.
   (Gerhard's version would slighly benefit from an INSTR directive.)

   No potential problem generating CSECTs greater than 64K,
   The program create bad machine code (e.g., register consraints
   for CLCL), some, but not all, are detected by the assembler.
   The generation instructions areactually dataareas. IBM recommends
   to use DATA directives, and is very reluctant to change/correct
   ASMDASM. So be it.
   But there is more.
   In A-constants in S4 into another CSECT (STRING),
   initially assembled together,
   not have offsets in the source.

   The listing view of both DISASM and ASMDASM contain useful
   information, I already had an ad_hoc spitbol to create
   something similar as with the original disassembler adding
   code, and addresses as comments. It was not difficult to
   recover the missing offsets
   The missing offsets could be recovered.


   What to do with base registers. Well, register 9 and 10 are
   used for datasection, that was easy.
   Register 11 is used in S4 for all the little subroutines.
   Many of them can be easily identified because the register
   is loaded from address constants.
   Nevertheless, at some point there seemedto occur a problem
   with overlapping USINGs.

   I gave up ASMDASM and used Gerhard's DISASM.

   Phase 3:

   With the initial disassebled source I tried to replace
   the large data parts by source and macros from an original SIL
   implementation.

   Since I found a V311 source and macros which nicely compiled
   and more or less Worked (Fortran IO seems to have problems)

   The V311 version allowed me to find labels for the
   subroutines (addresable by reg 11), and furthermore to
   identify the labels in the DATAxxxx part which
   allowed to define LABEL directives for DISASM.

   As a consequence, I could replace the data section by a slightly
   modified part from the V311 SIL. Furthermore, the V311 source
   version of SUBR was almost good.

   The SIL macro STRING switches between the S4 CSECT an a string
   pool CSECT STRING.
   The V311 version uses one LTORG pool (as well as the V35 one).

   The V35 binary is a SUPERZAPed version. A disassebly changes the
   order of one entry in the LTORG pool. Well, that could be fixed by
   cheating.  Anyway, the provided source does not use literals but
   "meaningful" labels. (There is an ISREDIT MACRO to change that).

   During all that time I also discovered lots of documents, and also
   books which happened to appear in thz archive.org. Small
   discusssions with Robert Dewar's brother and with Robert Gaskins.

   Phase 4:

   The initially ad-hoc program to produce the "augmented" source
   is a nice test program for SNOBOL4.  It actually works with
   SNOBOL4 V35 and V311 as well as with both SPITBOL on cbttape 404
   as well as with SPITBOL 370 on the SYSCPK. SPITBOL is a magnitude
   faster.

   I dad an early feature to replace labels in the literal ppol
   by literals
   which I abandoned in favour of the forementioed
   ISREDIT macro.
   (It's always fun to practice other sports and tools).

   This intermediate label replacing requires large amount of
   instructions (> 16M) which only SPITBOL 370 could handle.
   If you use hercules, you get lots of AUR exponent overflows due
   the intelLigent way of counting the number of statements using
   two floating point registers.

   As indicated in the s4n3 notice, the provided load module
   was not created direcly from SIL macros, but by a code optimizer
   and furthermore superzapped.

   Since I had already good labels in the source, I decided to
   merge SIL code as comments. This was a good refreeh of how to
   program in SNOBOL. Hint: Don't use large linked lists. The
   SNOBOL4 garbage collector does not survive that. (THe last time
   I had actively used SPITBOL was in 1987 to extract a unix
   C source product from Retix) into a set of PDS memers.

   The Fortran I/O routines are just disassembled versions.  There are
   issues in the Fortran IO with DD concatenation/multiple files.
   On MVS one can use the SYS1.FORTLIB (which has the same problem).
   The FORTRAN IV programmer's guide(s) in bitsavers may also be
   helpful. (Not only for FORTRAN.)

   The V311 inplementation can use VSF2 but requires not to
   call the fortran termination module, I did not investigate
   to which extent this is a common language environment problem.

   Using IFOX00 as assembler and the MVS IEWL required to replace
   some DS areas by DC in SUBR, Also, The code enhancing tool
   xan in handy because it automatically recognized DISASM REPLACE
   directives.

   The V311 version actually replced the entry point DATA by COMMON.
   I did not make that change (it wouldn't have changed the TXT
   part of the load module though).

   I adapted test programs from SPITBOL which I added to this file,
   and
   others from the green book.

   Conclusion:

   This new version has been created mostly using the
   disassembler DISASM from Gerhard Postpischil.

   The main module S4 is a mix of disassmbled code
   and comments from the SIL implementation available
   originally from the University of Arizona and others
   such as the Michigan Terminal System.

   The SUBR section is original source code slightly patched in order
   to create modules identical to the original one.

   I did not find an exact source version of the fortran IO.

   The provided load module in this package has the same
   TXT part as the original one, only the CESD and RLD
   parts are different but that's irrelevant.

   I did not invest (or waste) time to correct/enhance DISASM.
   300 lines of SPITBOL as aresult of experiments are preferable.


   I do not recommend to use this software for any production software
   but rather use the SPITBOL 370 implementation which nicely
   document. The 360 SPITBOL on cbt 404 is also somewhat outdated,
   e.g., PDS handling.

   The SYCCPK SPITBOL 370 has been updatd to provide a clean generation
   procedure for Z/OS as well as MVS-TK5

   nuf said

